# hydromet_dengue


## Data and `R` code from Lowe *et al.* (*The Lancet Planetary Health*, 2021)

Data and `R` code to support Lowe *et al.*, (2021). Exploring the delayed and nonlinear impact of hydrometeorological extremes on dengue risk along an urban gradient in Brazil: a space-time modelling study. *The Lancet Planetary Health* (in press). 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This study details a methodological framework to estimate the delayed and nonlinear impact of hydrometeoroloigcal extremes on dengue risk along an urban gradient. The approach builds upon previous studies to model the impact of climate and socio-economic factors in Brazil by coupling distributed lag nonlinear models (DLNM) ([Gasparrini *et al.*, 2013](https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3940) with space-time Bayesian hierarchical models ([Lowe *et al.*, 2014](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)70781-9), [Lowe *et al.*, 2018](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002613)) fitted using integrated nested Laplace approximations in `R` (R-INLA) ([Lindgren *et al.*, 2015](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v063i19)). The modelling approach simultaneously describes space-varying, non-linear, and delayed dependencies between dengue incidence rates and hydrometeorological factors. These exposure-lag-response associations can reveal how hydrometeorological extremes might impact dengue risk in the months leading up to an outbreak. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A description of each file and folder is provided below:

  **00_load_packages_data.R:** `R` script to load and process data needed to run DLNMs in INLA models. There is no need to run this script. It is sourced by the follwing scripts. 

  **01_visual_data.R:** `R` script to explore and visualise dengue, climate and socio-economic datasets.

  **02_model_models.R:** `R` script to run DLNM-INLA models of increasing complexity.

  **03_model_output.R:** `R` script to explore and visualise model outputs from the best fitting model.

  **04_lag_nonlinear_output.R:** `R` script to explore and visualise exposure-lag-response associations given different socio-economic scenarios.

  **05_sensitivity_analysis.R:** `R` script to test sensitivity of exposure-lag-response associations.
  
  **data:** a folder containing the database, data description, and a grid file for `facet_geo()` plots (in .csv format), and shapefiles (.shp, .shx, .dbf, .prj). 
  
  **figs:** a folder to save the figures generated by the `R` scripts.
  
  **output:** a folder to save the model outputs. This also contains a subfolder named **preds**, with the R script used to generate the cross-validation exercise and associated output files. 
  
  **hydromet_dengue.Rproj:** An `RStudio` project file, to avoid having to rename directories, etc. 

Download the repository as a ZIP file using the green button *Clone or download* above, then open the .Rproj file in `RStudio` to begin. 

For any issues with the code please contact [Rachel Lowe](https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/aboutus/people/lowe.rachel).
